Welcome back.
In this video going take a look at conditional statements and some more useful operators conditional
statements use when Want to check if a certain condition is true.
If so we can then tell the program what to do next.
For example you can check if a user is logged in and if they are then making sure the user's information
on the screen such as the username.
So let's first get started by looking at the most basic conditional statement.
The if statement.
Sort of begin by creating a couple of variables to work with.
So you see a dollar sign and the first variable is gone to be logged in an on set list to a boolean
value.
So if you remember that could be true or false.
So let's initially said that too true.
And then the second variable.
This is gonna be the user's name.
So this is a string.
So when I add the user name into the.
And then when I use a IF statement to check if a condition is true.
So begin by youzhny if keyword and then after that a set brackets so inside there.
This is the condition that we need to check against.
So we want to check if the user is logged in.
So to test if logged in is true.
Just insert the variable name of logged in.
Inside there.
And then we add the pair of curly races.
So if this condition is true then we run the code which is between the two curly braces.
So as an example if I were use it is logged in would have gone to echo to the browser a message just
saying welcome bark.
Then a comma and then and just add with the period for the dot the user name which is stored in the
variable called user.
And then don't forget the semicolon at the end of the statement.
So I'll just save that and then when I go over to the browser.
And then refresh this so great so we got the message saying welcome by Chris because our condition is
set to true.
If changes to be false we shouldn't get anything on the screen so our message is not displayed.
So that's a basic if statements.
So now we're going to move on to taking a look after using comparison operators.
Some went ahead earlier today.
That will be free schools website.
I'm on the comparison operators section so I can also use these comparisons with IF statements so I
can check if two values are equal.
And the double equals is for checking.
If two values are equal value and is also a triple equals which checks if the two values are equal value
and also the same type.
So by type 1 mean if they're both a string or both a number.
You can also combine wade in exclamation mark to do the exact opposite.
So this would be not equal.
We can use the less than or greater than symbol to check if condition is less than a smaller one.
We can also use less than or equal to a greater than unequal two.
So let's put these inside other statements as an example.
So I'm going to use a new variable.
So this is a number and I'll set this to be a initial value of 10.
So now we'll check in if the variable of no.
Is greater than 5.
Then can do a echo same statement is true.
So let's check that so our number is great in a 5.
So we should get the statement is true printed to the browser.
So let's just check the refresh.
And of course we do.
Changes to be less than.
This of course is false.
So the tech should disappear.
And just like on the doubly free schools website we can check using any of these operators so we can
use less than or equal to.
So we've said this to be 10.
This is of course equal to 10.
So this statement should be true.
Which is.
So we'll have before at the double and the triple equal symbol.
So let's begin with the double equals.
And rather than no.
Let's put this inside the causations sewn into a string.
So let's just say that in refresh and see what happens.
OK so we've got the statement as being true.
So all of the values above 10.
This is a number and this is classed as a string because in the quotations.
So let's just put a third equal symbol into there and save and then see what happens.
So will lose the text say in stayman is true and this is because using a tribble equals checks Borf
the value.
So the value is equal and also a type.
So the type is not equal because this is a string and this is a number.
OK.
A usent is statements are really good if we only want to test against one outcome.
But if want to test against more than one outcome we need to use a if l statements or even else.
If so let's first begin by using if else statements.
Unless it changes Bach to be a number.
So if number is less than 10 that changes to be the number is less than an.
So as you know the estate will check if the number is less than 10.
And then print it to the screen.
But you can also provide a second outcome to test against.
In case this is not true solver can use the.
Else key word and then inside the curly braces you can provide a second Echo.
So no is n less than 10 and the semicolon soul will initially check if this statement is true and if
not this will be printed to the screen.
So let's say that and then refresh.
So no is not less than 10.
And of course it isn't because it is number 10.
So you can just put a number operator in there so to test if the number is less than or equal to 10.
So save that.
And this should now change to say number is less than 10.
Or in fact equal to.
But what if you wanted to test against free or more conditions.
Well this is where else if comes in and was put these on separate lines just to make it look the more
readable.
So in between the if and the else were can changes to be ELSE IF and then use the brackets for a condition
to test against.
So first of all check in if the number is less than 10 will can then use the L safety test.
If the number is equal to 10.
So again the variable of no equal to 10.
Well change is to be number is 10.
And then finally if these options are both false will get the buckle up so can set the else statement
back into there as a fallback.
So it's standard and Acco number is not less or equal to 10.
So let's test this.
So first of all we'll set the number to be less than 10.
So should get number is less than 10.
Refresh.
So number is less than 10.
If the number was changed to be equal to 10.
Of course we should get this statement.
Of number is 10.
And then finally if the value is greater than 10 so should at 14 we should get.
No it's not less or equals 10.
So refresh.
And there were golts that I can use if else and ELSE IF statements to test against multiple outcomes.
Okay so the final thing I want to take a look at in this video is logical operators.
So let's go back over to the doubly free schools example and let's take a look at the logical operators
which is a little bit further down.
So as well as a test that we use before to test if conditions are less than greater than or equal to
for example you can also use the and operator.
To check if more than one condition is met and.
We can also check if one value or another is true.
And also the exclamation mark.
The test if a condition is not true.
OK.
So I want to start by creating two variables.
So number one.
And then also number two.
And as far as you can be 10.
Then they could remove everything else apart from the IF statements.
OK.
So you wanted to test against both of these conditions rather than just one.
So if number one was equal to 5.
I also want to check if number two is equal to 10.
So we can use the double ampersands or the key word.
So when we use these.
So number one is equal to five.
And also number two is equal to 10.
So I call stayman is true.
Shetter BACK to be the dollar.
They have a go.
So of course both these statements are true.
So will she get this print into the screen.
But if even of these two statements return false.
We shouldn't get anything at all.
So let's change that to be too.
So of course no one is not true.
Our money both for these to be true for this to be printed signed off with save a refresh we should
get the message moved.
A good change is to be or which is the two pipes.
So just like we've seen before we can use two pipes or.
Or.
Operator.
So now will need one of these statements to evaluate to true.
So number two is true.
Number one is false.
So now they should get the message printed again on the screen said etches test.
And then refresh which we do.
Okay.
That's it for this video.
And that's a basic look at conditional statements and some page be operators.
So thank you and I'll see it again.